---
title: Open Protein AI - User Guide
format:
  html:
    code-fold: true
---

## At a glance

This user guide provides a basic overview of the OpenProtein.AI web app.
You can create your first project, upload a dataset, and then use the
OpenProtein.AI tools to analyze that dataset, train sequence-to-function
prediction models, predict properties for new sequences, and design
optimized libraries. It also overviews the generative modeling
capabilities of the prots2prot model.

## Introduction to OpenProtein

This [article](introduction-page.md) gives an overview of the platform and its features. It is a good place to start to learn how to use the platform and 
what it can offer. 

## Demo datasets

This [article](demo-datasets-page.md) consists of links to download the walkthrough dataset and several other demo datasets.

## ML-guided mutagenesis and sequence-to-function modeling walkthrough

A simple [walkthrough](mutagenesis-page.md) of the OpenProtein.AI web app and the tools it provides for analyzing mutagenesis datasets, training
sequence-to-function prediction models, using those models to predict
properties for new sequences, and designing optimized libraries of
sequence variants. This walkthrough uses a deep mutational scanning
dataset of an aliphatic amide hydrolase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa
generated by [Wrenbeck et al.](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15695){target="_blank"}.

## Generative modeling and variant fitness prediction with prots2prot

Prots2prot is a guidable, retrieval-augmented generative model of
protein sequences. It conditions on homologues or protein family
representatives to predict variant effects and allow diverse sequence
design de novo. Prots2prot can be used to score and rank arbitrary
sequence variants, exhaustively map single substitution mutations, and
design bespoke, potentially high diversity, and novel sequences.
Prots2prot can be used to score and design substitutions, insertions,
deletions, and high order combinations thereof.